{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\fnil Times New Roman;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\tx440\tx880\tx1320\tx1760\tx2200\tx2640\tx3080\tx3520\tx3960\tx4400\tx4840\tx5280\tx5720\tx6160\tx6600\tx7040\tx7480\tx7920\tx8360\tx8800\tx9240\f0\fs22\par
\par
Professor:  What are those common -- the first question we ask ourselves is, is it ethical?  Should we do this?  And the second question we ask ourselves is, why are we doing this?  \par
\par
So why am I doing this?  Who is going to make money?  Either I'm doing it to make money or to gain knowledge.  Why do this?  Why waste my time?  \par
\par
And so one of the applications of all of data science is to help sell stuff.  So, customers, consumers of technology, commonly fall into this category.  Where they can be modeled in this way.  \par
\par
Modeled as consumers.  What we see, and this is from 1962, this is from a long time ago.  We'll have the early innovators.  People who say, "oh, this is cool technology!  Let's get it!"  It's the latest iPhone 27.  It's no better than 26, but it's new!  I want to be close to the science and have influence.  I'll be the one that tells everyone else they should use the iPhone 27.  \par
\par
Now, after that is about 13%.  And these are called the early adopters.  So the early adopters, they want that iPhone 27 as a status symbol.  They have to have some financial liquidity to be able to do that.  And they usually have a pretty good education.  \par
\par
So this is from a model that was built in the '60s.  \par
\par
Then there's the early majority.  Everybody else has an iPhone 27, I better go get it.  So they have some degree of extra time, some disposable income, and they'll eventually adapt the technology.  \par
\par
The old technology is going away.  I can't get by with my old computer.  Because it's not fast enough to run the newest operating system and nobody supports the old ones so I have to buy a new computer even though it's against my better thinking.  I would rather use an old computer that's hopping along at 1.6 megahertz.  Because I can type that fast.  It'll keep up with my typing.  \par
\par
And then there's the laggards.  The last 16%.  They won't buy it unless they have to.  I have a cellphone.  Sort of.  Kind of.  And it has an alarm on it that goes once a day.  That's how I find it.  That's how Mrs. Kinsmans, whose name is Elizabeth, says my phone is ringing.  And then I have to find it.  Most of the time my hearing is so bad I can't find it.  \par
\par
But!  When it comes to making a telephone call I use the landline.  The actual sound quality off a plane telephone is much higher.  Like, 16 times higher than my cellphone.  My cellphone gets -- the voice quality gets compressed until there's nothing left.  So here's a different composition of people that's going on.  \par
\par
How does that have to do with who is getting vaccinated in the United States?  \par
\par
What do you think folks?  Anything to do with who is getting vaccinated?  No, the elderly are not the early adopters.  The people who are early adopters for the vaccines -- the elderly were picked by choice to get them done first.  Who else was done first?  \par
\par
Who else got vaccines first?  Health care workers.  Yes.  \par
\par
Health care workers and doctors.  And that's because it's using risk management.  Somebody did a risk assessment and they said, we want those people who have a high risk of contracting COVID to be protected.  And it would be adversely difficult for our society if all the health care workers were sick.  \par
\par
So we need those people who are critical care workers to make sure they are functioning.  From then on out, they went on.  Eventually they got to educators and as soon as I could sign up I got it.  \par
\par
So the other people who are getting onto it and getting their first vaccine dose are the people who are smart.  They want to be smart.  Now, if you don't want to be smart you want to be lazy and you don't want others to tell you what to do.  That's a problem.  \par
\par
The other problem we have is that the location for which people are getting their information has shifted.  It used to be that when you went and got information, you would get up in the morning and read the newspaper.  The newspaper is carefully edited.  The newspaper has in it information that is accurate.  It must be accurate.  Because otherwise, the newspaper could get sued.  \par
\par
Now, unfortunately, there's other places that call themselves news.  Like FOXNEWS.  They give opinions under the guise of being news.  They're sowing doubt.  And doubt is a horrible thing.  You should not be caught in the doubt.  When you're doubting the vaccine, you're on the fence.  There's two strategies that work here.  \par
\par
1.  Get the vaccine as soon as you can.  \par
\par
2.  Hole up and isolate yourself completely.  Like New Zealand is doing.  They've done a great job.  The only problem with that strategy is now they are still at risk and vulnerable to infection.  At some point they may get a wave of COVID.  \par
\par
I want all of my students to be smart enough to get vaccinated.  I mean you're not just saving yourselves, but over the course of history, you'll be saving the lives of your grandchildren and your great, great grandchildren.  Otherwise this virus will mutate and go on for decades.  \par
\par
"I don't know about the side effects!"  \par
\par
I don't either!  But I knew that would outlive and survive every single side effect.  COVID I know would kill me.  Because I have enough oddball things there.  \par
\par
I was knocked out for like 2 or 3 days after the second shot.  So the second one -- yeah.  It can be a nuisance.  \par
\par
Once upon a time there was a person who invented transactional analysis.  We say psychological transactional analysis.  His way of thinking about things said that humans are always in one of three states.  You're either a parent, like a mentor, a teacher, nurturing, you're helping others.  That's a parent mode.  \par
\par
Or you're an adult.  You're being analytical and being a computer and working through things.  Or you're a child.  And we all have mixtures of these.  And we're all these different mixtures in different situations.  \par
\par
And it's really kind of interesting.  \par
\par
We're talking about shoppers.  People are going to come into my store.  What state do I want them in?  Do I want them to be parent-like?  Buy all the nutritional food for their kids?  Or, do I want them to be adults?  Analytical?  Or do I want -- oh!  I want them to be childish.  I want them to go through the store and say, "Dad, can I get this?"  \par
\par
"Dad, can I get one of these?  Mom?  I want to buy this.  Mom!"  If you're a parent, this will drive you nuts.  The kids are doing exactly what kids should do.  They're being curious.  That's great.  It's what they're doing.  Being curious and exploring things -- that's the job of children.  To explore.  To experiment.  They're doing the scientific method before it gets driven out of them by somebody who thinks they know better.  Some politician.  \par
\par
Anyway!  I went to the grocery store the other day.  Hey, look!  I don't know if you can see that or not but it's some chips.  There's some other chips.  Oh boy.  There was like -- oh look at them!  They're low prices and right on the ends.  Aren't they tempting?  Look at that!  \par
\par
They put those right on the endcaps.  Where I could say, "hmm . . . I remember eating those chips.  It's a good mixture of fat and salt and a little sugar thrown in sometimes."  \par
\par
By the way, you're probably not parents yet, but some of you might be.  If you go shopping with kids, I have heard that if you give them a task to do it switches them from being in child mode to parent mode.  I have heard this but haven't tried this.  This is hearsay.  It's a rumor.  But you can try it and it might work on your kids or not.  \par
\par
You go shopping and you say, " I want you to pick out one can to donate to the canned food group."  And that gives them a task.  Now they have an analytical task.  It can switch them into -- if they're helping somebody else, that puts them in parent mode.  When they're all done they buy the can and you donate it to the food group.  Or if they're making a careful analytical choice about the best desert for them or even buy the best vegetable, that puts them in adult mode.  \par
\par
They have a problem to solve.  That's adult.  Otherwise they're impulsive.  And stores love it when children run around being impulsive.  \par
\par
I went to the Maker Fair once because I'm a maker.  I like to make things.  Here was a yelp stand.  Holy cow.  I actually remember her name, still!  So this was a stand for yelp.  And here on the table was free stuff!  I love free stuff.  Free!  Free, free, free . . . got it.  \par
\par
So here on the table were free things.  My childish side said this is all free, go for it!  Pick it up!  It turns out this free stuff is a yelp beer opener.  Before I could go too far with it, my adult came in and said, "Wait, you don't drink beer.  This has no purpose in my life."  \par
\par
Even the free stuff, I said put it back.  Let somebody else have it.  \par
\par
So that's -- it's also been shown that if you give students free T-shirts they'll run around advertising for you, for free.  I don't advertise for other people unless they pay me.  \par
\par
They will put impulse items where they're easily grabbed.  It's on you to be a mature adult.  Maturity means you need to override your cognitive biases.  \par
\par
Here's Brenda.  I don't know why I remember her name.  But I do.  And this was 5 years ago when I took this picture.  What does Brenda do for yelp?  What would you guess?  \par
\par
Gang, you have to have a first guess.  \par
\par
PR Intern.  OK.  Public relationship.  Right.  That's a good guess.  Because she's doing public relations.  And you would think, oh she's fairly young and attractive, right?  Anybody else want to guess?  \par
\par
Advertise?  OK.  No -- OK.  \par
\par
Yeah.  She might be a developer and she had to go out and she's working on a Saturday.  She's a recruit.  \par
\par
Our brains would look at Brenda and think she's attractive.  She has blonde hair.  You would think she might be a spokesmodel for yelp.  \par
\par
It is on you as an adult to use your maturity and overcome those first bias guesses.  Our brain is a machine for jumping to conclusions.  Those conclusions have been given by TV shows.  You have to put those all aside.  Remember when I told you about students doing jigsaw puzzle pieces?  They wouldn't put the piece that fit into the place?  Why did they not put that last piece into the puzzle?  Anybody remember?  \par
\par
Why didn't they put the last jigsaw puzzle -- yes.  It had the wrong appearance.  The appearance did not match.  It had a different texture, it had a different color, but appearance is no measure for how well something fits in.  \par
\par
You have to be adults and get over that.  Brenda is the Western New York regional manager for all of yelp.  She could have hired somebody right then and there.  She's always looking for help to help them manage yelp.  So I asked her role.  She said she was the Northwest Regional Manager.  And we had a great conversation about how the yelp algorithm works and how to avoid the yelp effect.  What are they doing now?  \par
\par
Got it.  \par
\par
Again, remember to be mature.  It really helps.  So the expression there is, do not jump to conclusions.  Or, jump to conclusions but then question them.  So I have people who are in different mixtures of intelligences or whatever and I need to figure out how to get them into the right group.  To do this, we use something called the expectation maximization algorithm.  Oh crap.  He's teaching us another algorithm on the last day of class.  Yes, I am!  \par
\par
So I'm going to form my hypothesis classes and then for each data point, form a model of which for that data point how much does it belong to each of those subgroups?  This is called the expectation step.  So I have a potato chip.  \par
\par
It's 30% potatoes.  Starch.  And then the rest of it is sugar.  That's not right.  It has a bunch of oil in there.  You can taste it.  So I assign it what fraction of each group and then I take the next food.  It may be popcorn.  But it's caramelized popcorn.  It has a certain amount of carbs and sugar . . . \par
\par
I can assign it to each of the groups I'm analyzing.  OK?  Now, it's got a certain fraction of each.  The maximization step says, given all the data I've classified into each of the one models, figure out what the new average is for those different prototypes.  So I take all the data that has been assigned however fractionally to all those groups and I compute the maximization.  \par
\par
I'm updating my prototypes.  So this first part is assign to prototypes.  Fractionally.  And the next part here is, update the prototype models.  The mathematical models.  You do this repeatedly just like with k-means until things stop changing or don't change quickly.  \par
\par
This is the EM algorithm.  This solves the problem of the chicken and the egg.  I don't know the right mathematical model.  I start running this and let it find a solution.  It stabilizes over time.  OK.  When it's stable you have a few improved models for your data and a model of how each data point belongs to each class.  \par
\par
OK.  Let's press on.  \par
\par
Oh, yeah.  I have a one dimensional example of . . . this is a reminder to myself this can happen.  We've seen this before in terms of intelligence.  You can look at this group here . . . right?  Oops.  Wrong way.  \par
\par
So I have one peak here, I have another little peak here.  This doesn't even need to be a pick.  It just needs to be a lump out the side.  You can visually say, lump number 1 and lump number 2.  What do you call a distribution that has two lumps in it?  \par
\par
It was on the last exam.  Yes.  Bimodal.  If some snow folk were high and some short, it's bimodal.  This is a two dimensional model and you can see the concentrations.  \par
\par
Look at this.  This is an eclipse.  What distance metric would we use for the bottom ellipse?  Would that be the Euclidean distance?  You bet it's the Mahalanobis distance.  We could also being using that Mahalanobis distance up here.  \par
\par
So the Mahalanobis distance is a superset of the Euclidean distance.  The Mahalanobis distance is what you get when you take a circle and stretch it into an ellipse and then you rotate it.  That's what it is.  \par
\par
And the probability stretch out in one direction and squish in in the other direction.  The total probability is still one for a Mahalanobis distribution.  Any questions about this?  \par
\par
OK.  Good.  \par
\par
So, mixture models.  We can analyze people any one of a number of different ways.  We can think of them as being parents, adults, and children.  What's that called again?  When thinking about that way?  It's a psychological measure of . . . what mode are they in?  They can transition from one mode to the other depending on how I queue them.  I will queue them with tasty things to get them to transition them.  That's transitional analysis.  \par
\par
People are mixtures of sick and healthy.  Sure.  They could be sick, healthy, or somewhere between.  I'm somewhere between.  Always.  \par
\par
Customers could be either early innovators, early adopters, and the late majority are laggards.  Or some mixture of all, depending on where they are.  \par
\par
You should be able to answer these questions.  How would you use the Mahalanobis distance for k-means?  \par
\par
A lot of students think you can do bullet 4.  But you have to do some rotation there.  Make it axially aligned and then squish the axis in and out.  There's a mixture model, you should be able to talk about those.  \par
\par
What algorithm is used to form mixture models?  Not only do I have a mixture, but I don't know how many are in each different type.  What is the algorithm called algorithm?  Emily, do you know what algorithm is used for forming mixture models?  \par
\par
Emily, are you with me?  Em?  Are you there?  \par
\par
[Professor Laughing.]  \par
\par
Em!  Why am I bugging Emily?  Because it's the EM algorithm.  Exactly.  The EM algorithm.  Expectation maximization algorithm.  Right.  That's what we use to form mixture models.  It's very similar to k-means expect each time we update the prototypes we also update the fraction of the data that's in each prototype, essentially.  \par
\par
What are mixture models?  What's the chicken and the egg problem?  This is the problem of not knowing what fraction of the data is in each prototype.  And not knowing what prototypes are.  So you run the EM algorithm and that solves the problem.  How do we model shoppers?  What's the first rule of mining people?  \par
\par
OK?  \par
\par
What's my first rule of doing people datamining?  No . . . Alice is right.  My first assumption is that everybody is exactly like me.  And that's a good guess.  Doesn't matter what color they are, how large they are, how short they are, whether they're like me . . . I have a scratchy face and I have acne . . . you should assume everybody else is exactly like you.  Doesn't matter if they're underweight over overweight, old, young, whatever.  \par
\par
My mother grew to be very old and she loved wearing sneakers.  Even though she was old, she had a strong kid in her.  \par
\par
OK.  Good.  Let's do -- I'll stop sharing for a minute.  I'll do a quiz.  I have about -- how many minutes do I have left?  \par
\par
Student:   8.  \par
\par
Professor:  That's it?  Blast.  \par
\par
Let me go find my myCourses entry.  Go find 420 . . . find the midterm . . . \par
\par
I'm looking.  \par
\par
[Recording stopped.]  \par
\par
[Recording in progress.]  \par
\par
I'm getting there!  \par
\par
OK.  I'm taking the quiz.  I'm taking the same midterm you took.  I just need to share out desktop number 2.  \par
\par
OK, first question.  RIT honor code.  If you can't pick one of the following things, you're in deep trouble.  Pick yes.  \par
\par
Naive Bayes.  I guarantee that there will be another one like this on the final exam.  You should definitely know how to do this one.  Naive Bayes.  Let's see.  What did I get?  I got a random drawing.  Given the following factor table and it's telling me that today is a school day.  \par
\par
And the fact that it is currently raining.  Oh.  It's a school day and it's raining.  OK.  I'll go -- it's a school day.  Yes.  I don't care about any of this data, then.  It's raining.  OK.  And that means I don't care about this.  I've just crossed off the things I don't care about.  I've been given the conditions I need to think about.  \par
\par
Now I'll evaluate the probability of using road \i\f1 x\i0\f0  given the conditions.  OK?  \par
\par
And that's equal to . . . let's see . . . the probability of road \i\f1 x\i0\f0  will be 4 out of 7.  Is that right?  Times . . . road \i\f1 x\i0\f0  on the right hand side is 5 out of 7.  Times how often do I take road \i\f1 x\i0\f0 ?  7 out of 12.  And is that a probability?  No, it's not a probability.  \par
\par
Harrison, I think so.  But pay attention to this, now.  OK?  It might not be.  \par
\par
Road \i\f1 z\i0\f0  is 1 out of 5 times \super\f1 2\nosupersub\f2\u8260?\sub\f1 5\nosupersub\i  \i0\f0 times \super\f1 5\nosupersub\f2\u8260?\sub\f1 12\nosupersub .\i  \i0\f0  OK?  When we do this?  You should see a pattern.  OK.  Look.  There's a 7 and a 7 they cancel.  Here's a 5 and a 5.  You should always have one canceling thingy here.  \par
\par
These things here give me relative probabilities.  There not not absolute probabilities.  What would I need to do to get them into probabilities I would report to my boss?  \par
\par
I would normalize them.  Yes.  I would normalize them.  Good.  Meaning, I add up the total relative probabilities, I divide each probability by the total, and I get a normalized probability.  What is bootstrap aggregation?  OK.  Let's go on.  \par
\par
These are different unit vectors.  The importance of the different unit vectors, the graph of the L0.5 norm, that's like this one here.  This top one.  \par
\par
Right there.  \par
\par
Good.  \par
\par
The whole point is, I'm changing the distance metric and when I change the distance metric, I get different shaped clusters.  That means that if I choose the L1 norm, I get clusters that look like this.  If I use L2 norm, I get clusters like this.  \par
\par
Harrison -- ask me later.  Everybody got a couple of questions drawn out of 630 questions.  Everybody got different questions drawn at random from a question bank.  OK?  I could give you the same exact questions for the final exam.  They might actually be the same exact questions for the final exam.  \par
\par
OK.  Everybody blew this one.  \par
\par
We have seen the following demonstration for computer vision about the Naive Bayes.  Here's the problem:  People didn't read the question.  Here on the bottom is the question.  That's the question we want you to ask.  Right here.  \par
\par
What intuition does this represent for the Naive Bayes classifier?  Everybody blew this.  I don't think anybody got it right.  So, I compute some amount of yellowness.  And I add up all the yellowness here on the right.  And then I add up all the yellowness here -- and I get that down here.  Then, I cross multiply using an outer product the top one times the left one and I get a lot of yellowness here.  I get a little here, but not as big.  \par
\par
I can locate the thing here.  What intuition does this tell me about Naive Bayes?  What does it say about feature \i\f1 x\i0\f0  and feature \i\f1 y\i0\f0 ?  What are the assumptions about the Naive Bayes classifier we're using that are met here?  \par
\par
They're statistically independent.  \i\f1 x\i0\f0  and \i\f1 y\i0\f0  are independent of each other.  This shows you visually that \i\f1 x\i0\f0  and \i\f1 y\i0\f0  are separable.  OK.  Bunch of things here.  \par
\par
We can go through this and that . . . I have to show you one other thing.  \par
\par
Bear with me.  \par
\par
This transformational thinking . . . \par
\par
You should definitely know the PCA trap.  I'm one of the only people in the world who teaches it.  I invented the term.  Most people don't know about it.  \par
\par
Here's a bunch -- which of the following classifiers use feedback when training?  A neural network.  Sure.  That helps.  Decision tree using AdaBoost.  Yes.  Adaptive boosting could be the answer.  Uh oh.  It's going back and forth between.  What's the answer to this one?  \par
\par
Artificial neural network definitely uses feedback for training.  And a decision tree with adaptive boosting has feedback.  Support vector machines?  Kind of.  But mainly these first two use feedback.  And the answer is you could be put a 3-layered artificial neural network or this one and you'll get full credit.  \par
\par
Yeah, I know.  There's two right answers.  Bummer.  \par
\par
What says you cannot be sure if a deep-learning neural network is better or not?  \par
\par
Right.  Exactly.  The No Free Lunch Theorem.  That is the governing principal of datamining that says you can't know for sure.  \par
\par
Oh man.  A hard question.  Other people came up with this before.  OK.  So that's the theorem.  Now, I know that I need to use the No Free Lunch theorem to choose my parameters for my decision tree or the parameters for the best binning.  What procedure do I need to use to make sure that I get the best values for my parameters?  \par
\par
What procedure?  \par
\par
The procedure is . . . \i\f1 n\i0\f0 -fold cross validation.  Yes.  That's the procedure we use.  And so it's the way you get the answer.  Any question that says what is the best way or how can you know for sure is almost always likely to be the n-fold cross validation.  You have to build it and test it to be sure.  \par
\par
What's this?  Oh.  A couple of other things.  Questions along the way.  The other one people got wrong I was surprised at is this.  I have a decision boundary.  I've got a decision boundary -- bear with me, I know I'm over time.  \par
\par
Here's my decision boundary.  It's a line.  So, that decision boundary is one way I could find a separation between the two classes.  Now, one way of thinking about it is, oh you're on one side of the line and on the other side of the line.  Another way to think about it is to think about using something else.  What's the duel of using a decision boundary?  \par
\par
Exactly.  Yu Ling.  Perfect.  Use a projection vector.  That's the dual.  \par
\par
OK?  I am over time.  I'm going to stop recording and I'll hang out in case anybody has questions.  I think this is the last formal class.  And I would like to thank all my captionists.  They're quite, they're there, and typing like mad.  I've been told I talk fast.  \par
\par
I would like to thank the interpreters for helping me work with you.  \par
\par
[Recording stopped.]  \par
\par
OK?  \par
\par
Student:   Dr. Kinsman?  I have a question about the format for the final exam.  Will it be similar compared to the other tests?  \par
\par
Professor:  Yes.  \par
\par
Student:   For the length, is it 2 and a half hours?  \par
\par
Professor:  Oh yeah it's like 2 and a half hours.  For the final exam, you should be prepared for 2 and a half hours of grueling difficult sweaty calculations.  There's definitely going to be a Naive Bayes calculation.  You may have to do \i\f1 m\i0\f0  estimation.  Remember that?  It's tricky.  \par
\par
I haven't looked at the 420 final exam.  I set it and forget it.  And then we test it later on and then we work on that as it goes.  \par
\par
There will definitely be questions about artificial neural networks.  We haven't had questions on the last midterm.  Anything not covered on the last midterm is probably on the final exam.  Artificial neural networks, support vector machines . . . things like that.  \par
\par
I'm going to hang out.  Carol, can you hang out?  \par
\par
Interpreter:  I have another class to get to.  \par
\par
Professor:  OK.  Does anybody who needs interpreting have any questions?  I won't know who you are.  \par
\par
Interpreter:  I'm not sure anybody is left who uses interpreters.  \par
\par
Professor:  I don't know who they are.  I don't know.  OK.  Good.  Then I think we will dismiss the class.  And I'm going to hang out for a couple minutes.  Thank you all!  \par
\par
Student:   I have one more question.  About the feedback for our most recent test.  Do you know when that will come out?  \par
}
 